---
title: 'Comprehensive guide to managing dotfiles'
date: '2024-06-03'
lastmod: '2024-06-03'
tags:
  [
    'dotfiles',
    'distro-hopping',
    'developer-productivity',
    'ricing',
    'docker',
    'unix',
    'linux',
    'gnu-stow',
    'neovim',
    'ansible-playbook',
    'lab',
    'devops',
  ]
draft: true
summary: 'By configuring global gitignore and tweeking '
images: ['/static/images/managing-dotfiles/dotfiles-banner.webp']
layout: PostLayout
---

![Samurai Tux](/static/images/managing-dotfiles/dotfiles-banner.webp)

# What are dotfiles?

Dotfiles are hidden configuration files that are used to
customize the behaviour of various programs in Unix-based
operating systems like GNU/Linux and macOS. For example, the
dotfile `.zshrc` (typically present in the user's home
directory) can be used to customize the user's zsh shell.

# The problem with dotfiles

## New computers

Typically, we tend to customize the computer programs that
we use on a regular basis to get our work done faster.
Customizations might range from adding a few custom key
biddings or changing the programs appearance.

## Owning multiple computers

If you own multiple computers, customizations done to a
program installed on a computer won't automatically
propogate to other computers.

For example, changing your office computer's Z shell's
prompt won't change the prompt of the Z shell installed on
your personal Desktop computer.

Syncing the customizations across multiple devices is the
user's responsibilty... The user has to manually compare the
appropriate configuration files present in multiple
computers, carefully merge the differences, copy the new
version of the configuration files to all the devices and
ensure that they work... This method of keep the
configuration files in sync across multiple devices is time
consuming, tedious and risky.
